It was Kust who found this crypt. I'd asked him to move a chest and while he was dragging it across the floor the stones gave way to reveal the tunnel. He had been saying for some time that he could feel a draft coming from this side of the hall, but I had dismissed it as the seasonal chill of this Nordic climate. There's a lesson in that.

Kust installed the trapdoor and the ladder. The bench and candles are our addition, too. There is no doubt this place is holy, but when we found it the darkness was so intense that we struggled to pierce it even with magelight. Though the darkness of the crypt itself is lifted, the mystery of who was interred here remains. No clue have we uncovered, and there are none in Falkreath who remember any rumour or knowledge of this place. Who might have been laid to rest in such a place? Some ancient priest of Arkay, perhaps? Needless to say we would not disturb the sarcophagus even were it not sealed. I have no idea if it even contains any remains. In the absence of information, I am left to ruminate. I record here my speculations.

That it is old, I claim no scholarly credit for observing. Older than the Hall of the Dead above, no doubt. It may explain why the Hall of the Dead was built where it was, and maybe even why Falkreath's cemetery grew so large. Why it was sealed up and hidden, I cannot guess. The arrangement of the sarcophagus and the shrine in relation to the crypt's entrance imply that though the sarcophagus (and, one assumes, its internee) is important, it was not intended to be the focal point of the crypt. The shrine claims that privilege. And though it is clearly blessed by Arkay's beneficence, the shrine upon the altar functions differently to any shrine of Arkay I have encountered. We may never have discovered its purpose had we not received a frantic knock upon the door of the hall one night, mere days after excavating the crypt.

He was not the first repentant necromancer I have assisted in fleeing the order, and Arkay willing he will not be the last. I didn't ask his name, and he did not offer it. He asked a blessing and begged such supplies as I could provide to help him flee as far from here as possible. And he asked to see the crypt. News had spread fast, it seemed.

I escorted him down into the crypt - many had come to have a look since the discovery, so his request did not seem unusual - but before I could react he had withdrawn a number of black soul gems from his mud-spattered robes and held them out before him, towards the shrine. As I beheld them and realised what they were, they were transformed before my very eyes. What was black was now white. And where before only a few of the gems could be seen to contain souls, now all were filled with light - as was the crypt, which has retained its glow.

Memory of this shrine, he swiftly explained, while forgotten by the people of Falkreath and Arkay's priesthood, lived on in rumours among the necromancers. They spoke of a shrine where the captured souls of men, elves and beastfolk could be returned to Arkay's embrace and His cycle of death and rebirth, and where the means of capturing them could be surrendered. In return, the supplicant is rewarded with grand soul gems, white in hue, filled with Arkay's light. It is, of course, technically forbidden for them to speak of it, but when has that ever stopped apprentices? I had hoped to question him further that night and discover what else the necromancers might know that we have forgotten, but the man was visibly exhausted. Indeed, the transformation he had undergone himself was no less striking than that of the soul gems. He seemed a man at peace now, relieved of a heavy burden. I would not have asked how he filled those black soul gems which had contained souls, but I could guess. No wonder that he now seemed so at peace.

What questions I still had for him, however, went unanswered. When Kust and I awoke the next morning, the man was gone. He had left behind the filled grand soul gems and I have examined these at length. They contain no soul of any sort that I can see, which is good - many of the more hardline priests of Arkay would hesitate to work with any soul, black or white - and yet the light that now fills them can be used to recharge or create enchantments just the same as any soul. It forms a simulacrum of sorts.

Since then, word has spread and others have come with black soul gems - adventurers, priests, monks, crusading knights - fresh from clearing out nests of necromancers to convert their most unholy spoils to something more palatable. I wish them all well, but it is the penitent necromancer in the muddy robes to whom my thoughts and my prayers turn on Skyrim's coldest nights. Wherever he is, I hope he is well - and perhaps somewhere a little warmer.

- Runil